>> Woodruff: GOOD EVENING,
I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
>> Woodruff: ON THE NEWSHOUR
TONIGHT:
A SEARCH REIGNITES: THE
INVESTIGATION TO VERIFY WHETHER
DEBRIS FROM THE INDIAN OCEAN IS
WRECKAGE FROM A MISSING
MALAYSIAN AIRLINER.
>> Ifill: A PLEA OF NOT GUILTY.
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI POLICE
OFFICER DISPUTES CRGESHA OF
MURDER.
HOW A COMMUNITY RESPONDS TO
ANOTHER FATAL SHOOTING.
>> Woodruff: THEN, HUMANS NEED
NOT APPLY.
WHY THE JOBS OF THE FUTURE MAY
BE FILLED BY ROBOTS.
WILL THIS HELP OR HURT
HUMANKIND?
>> PEOPLE IN THE SILICON VALLEY
BELIEVE THAT WHAT WE'RE DOING IS
GOD'S WORK.
WE ARE MAKING THE WORLD A BETTER
PLACE.
>> AND IT IS GOING TO DISRUPT
INDUSTRIES AND CREATE
UNEMPLOYMENT ON A SCALE THAT WE
HAVEN'T IMAGINED BEFORE.
>> Ifill: PLUS, SCALING BACK ON
THE NUTS AND BOLTS THAT HOLD US
TOGETHER, WHEN FEDERAL FUNDS
GROW SCARCE.
STOP-GAP SOLUTIONS TO MAINTAIN
SAFE SIDEWALKS, ROADS AND
BRIDGES.
>> Woodruff: ALL THAT AND MORE
ON TONIGHT'S PBS NEWSHOUR.
>> Ifill: THE U.S. SENATE SENT
LEGISLATION TO THE PRESIDENT
TODAY AUTHORIZING A THREE-MONTH
PATCH TO FUND THE NATION'S
HIGHWAYS AND TRANSIT SYSTEMS.
THE HIGHWAY TRUST FUND WAS SET
TO RUN DRY ON JULY 31.
A BIPARTISAN SENATE DEAL FOR A
SIX-YEAR FUNNG BDIILL MADE IT
THROUGH THE SENATE THIS MORNING,
BUT IT HAS LITTLE SUPPORT IN THE
HOUSE.
THE CO-SPONSORS OF THAT BILL
WERE OKLAHOMA REPUBLICAN JIM
INHOFE AND DEMOCRAT BARBARA
BOXER OF CALIFORNIA.
SHE LAID BLAME ON THE HOUSE FOR
LEAVING TOWN WITHOUT A
LONG-TERM SOLUTION.
>> THEY SHOULD HAVE STAYED
ANOTHER WEEK.
BECAUSE THERE ARE SEVERAL THINGS
THEY COULD DO, ONE: THEY COULD
WRITE THEIR OWN BILL, TWO: THEY
COULD TAKE UP OUR BILL AND
THREE, THEY COULD DO JUST A
SMALL BILL AND WE COULD GET TO
CONFERENCE.
I WOULD HAVE PREFERRED THAT
BECAUSE I HATE THE IDEA OF
ANOTHER SHORT TERM EXTENSION.
>> Ifill: THIS MARKS THE 34th
EXTENSION CONGRESS HAS PASSED
SINCE 2009.
AND IT KICKS NEGOTIATIONS INTO
THE FALL.
WE'LL HAVE A LOOK AT HOW ONE
STATE, OREGON, IS DEALING WITH
DWINDLING ROAD FUNDS LATER IN
THE PROGRAM TONIGHT.
>> Woodruff: THE U.S. ECONOMY
EXPANDED IN THE SECOND QUARTER
OF THIS YEAR, BOOSTED BY SOLID
CONSUMER SPENDING.
THE COMMERCE DEPARTMENT REPORTED
THE GROSS DOMESTIC PRODUCT GREW
TO A 2.3 PERCENT ANNUAL RATE.
BUT WALL STREET PRIMARILY PAID
ATTENTION TO CORPORATE EARNINGS
REPORTS TODAY AND ENDED THE DAY
MOSTLY FLAT.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
LOST FIVE POINTS
TO CLOSE AT 17,746.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 17 POINTS,
AND THE S&P 500 ADDED A FRACTION
OF A POINT.
>> Ifill: ONE OUT OF EVERY FIVE
ADULTS IN THE U.S. HAS A
DISABILITY, MEANING THE TOTAL
NUMBER OF AMERICANS LIVING WITH
A DISABILITY IS 53 MILLION.
THE NEW STUDY FROM THE CENTERS
FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND
PREVENTION GIVES A STATE-BY-
STATE LOOK AT DISABILITY TYPES.
AMONG THE FINDINGS, THE HIGHEST
PERCENTAGE OF PEOPLE WITH
DISABILITIES ARE IN THE SOUTH:
ALABAMA, MISSISSIPPI AND
TENNESSEE RANKED HIGHEST.
AND BLACK AND HISPANIC ADULTS
ARE MORE LIKELY TO HAVE A
DISABILITY THAN WHITES.
>> Woodruff: ROLLING STONE
MAGAZINE'S MANAGING EDITOR IS
STEPPING DOWN AFTER 19 YEARS.
WILL DANA'S DEPARTURE IS THE
LATEST FALLOUT FROM A NOVEMBER
2014 ARTICLE ABOUT AN ALLEGED
GANG RAPE AT THE UNIVERSITY OF
VIRGINIA.
THE PIECE WAS LATER RETRACTED
AND HAS BEEN WIDELY DISCREDITED.
YESTERDAY, THREE MEMBERS OF THE
FRATERNITY AT THE CENTER OF THE
ACCUSATIONS FILED A DEFAMATION
LAWSUIT AGAINST ROLLING STONE
AND THE ARTICLE'S AUTHOR.
>> Ifill: IN AFGHANISTAN, THE
TALIBAN CONFIRMED THE DEATH OF
THEIR LONGTIME LEADER, MULLAH
OMAR, AND THEY APPOINTED HIS
SUCCESSOR.
OMAR'S DEPUTY, MULLAH AKHTAR
MANSOOR, WAS ELEVATED TO LEAD
THE GROUP BY THE TALIBAN'S
SUPREME COUNCIL.
BUT THAT PUT A SECOND ROUND OF
PEACE TALKS BETWEEN THE AFGHAN
GOVERNMENT AND TALIBAN ON HOLD,
AS THEY ASSESSED THE NEW
LEADERSHIP.
>> Woodruff: HUNDREDS OF
MIGRANTS FROM THE MEDITERRANEAN
STORMED THE CHANNEL TUNNEL THAT
LINKS FRANCE AND BRITAIN TODAY.
RIOT POLICE WERE DEPLOYED TO THE
NORTHERN FRENCH PORT TOWN OF
CALAIS TO SECURE THE PASSAGEWAY.
BRITISH PRIME MINISTER DAVID
CAMERON WARNED HIS COUNTRY WON'T
BECOME A SAFE HAVEN FOR
MIGRANTS.
CORDELIA LYNCH OF INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS HAS OUR REPORT.
>> Reporter: CRAWLING THROUGH A
SMALL HOLE IN A FENCE, THIS IS
HOW MANY MIGRANTS GET AROUND THE
RAILSIDE DEFENSES BEFORE THEY
MAKE A PERILOUS WALK TO THE
CHANNEL TUNNEL ALONG TRAIN
TRACKS.
THIS SCENE IS PLAYED OUT
THROUGHOUT THE DAY BUT
NAVIGATING THEIR WAY TO A BETTER
LIFE IS AUGFRHT WITH RISK.
IT'S A CONTINUOUS GAME OF CAT
AND MOUSE.
MANY HAVE FLED WAR BUT THEY
CAN'T ESCAPE CONFLICT.
THE MIGRANT PROBLEM HAS BEEN
RUMBLING FOR 20 YEARS, SIMMERING
BENEATH IT A STANDOFF BETWEEN
BOTH SIDES OF THE CHANNEL.
SOME IN FRANCE BELIEVE THEY'RE
BEING ASKED TO DO BRITAIN'S
DIRTY WORK.
IT'S BEGINNING TO LOOK LIKE A
TOXIC GAME OF POLITICAL
FOOTBALL.
THE BRITISH SOLUTION IS MORE
FENCES AND MORE POLICE AND YET
STILL THE MIGRANTS COME.
IT SEEMS ALL THAT'S ON OFFER IS
A SHORT-TERM FIX FOR AN
INTRACTABLE PROBLEM.
120 GENDARMES AND RIOT POLICE
HAVE BEEN SENT TO THE TUNNEL.
BUT THE MAN COORDINATING THE
RESPONSE BELIEVES THE ANSWER IS
POLITICAL.
>> WHAT I'M SURE IS THAT
SOLUTION IS NOT A GAME.
THAT IS CERTAIN.
THE SOLUTION IS NOT A POLICE
SOLUTION OR FORCES POLICE OR
DIFFERENT THINGS ADMINISTRATIVE.
THE SOLUTION IS POLITICAL.
>> Reporter: BUT THERE ARE CLEAR
BATTLE LINES BEING DRAWN AND
IT'S CLAIMING LIVES.
10 SINCE JUNE.
THOUSANDS MORE DIED JUST TRYING
TO GET HERE.
>> Woodruff: SOME 3,000 MIGRANTS
ARE BELIEVED TO BE LIVING IN A
MAKESHIFT CAMP NEAR THE CHANNEL
TUNNEL'S ENTRANCE.
>> Ifill: THE ONLY MAN SENTENCED
TO DIE FOR THE 1993 BOMBINGS IN
MUMBAI, INDIA WAS EXECUD BYTE
HANGING TODAY.
YAH-CUBE MEMON WAS CONVICTED IN
2007 FOR HELPING TO RAISE FUNDS
TO CARRY OUT INDIA'S DEADLIEST
TERROR ATTACK.
257 PEOPLE WERE KILLED.
THE BLASTS HIT THE MUMBAI STOCK
EXCHANGE, THREE HOTELS, AND
MULTIPLE OTHER SITES OVER A TWO-
HOUR PERIOD.
HUMAN RIGHTS GROUPS PROTESTED
THE EXECUTION.
INDIA'S LEGAL SYSTEM ALLOWS
EXECUTION IN "THE RAREST OF THE
RARE CASES".
>> Woodruff: A SWELTERING HEAT
WAVE HAD ITS GRIP ON MUCH OF THE
MIDDLE EAST TODAY, WITH
TEMPERATURES MORE THAN 25
DEGREES ABOVE NORMAL.
THE HEAT WAS SO EXTREME THE
IRAQI GOVERNMENT DECLARED A
FOUR-DAY HOLIDAY, BEGINNING
TODAY, TO KEEP PEOPLE INDOORS AS
TEMPERATURES TOPPED 122 DEGREES.
SOME BAGHDAD RESIDENTS BEAT THE
HEAT BY TAKING ADVANTAGE OF
WATER MISTERS AT LOCAL MARKETS,
WHILE OTHERS TOOK A DIP IN THE
TIGRIS RIVER.
>> Ifill: STILL TO COME ON THE
NEWSHOUR:
INVESTIGATORS WORK TO DETERMINE
WHETHER PLANE DEBRIS IS WRECKAGE
OF THE MISSING MALAYSIA AIRLINES
FLIGHT.
CINCINNATI'S POLICE CHIEF ON THE
LATEST FATAL SHOOTING BY AN
OFFICER.
AND MUCH MORE.
>> Woodruff: THE YEAR-PLUS
MYSTERY OVER WHAT HAPPENED TO A
MISSING MALAYSIAN AIRLINER IS
CAPTURING THE WORLD'S ATTENTION
ONCE AGAIN AFTER WRECKAGE TURNED
UP ON AN ISLAND NEAR MADAGASCAR,
A LONG WAY FROM THE SEARCH AREA.
SMALL WAVES ROLLED IN ALONG THE
COAST OF THE INDIAN OCEAN ISLAND
OF REUNION, JUST A DAY AFTER THE
WORLD'S ATTENTION WAS BROUGHT TO
DEBRIS WASHED UP ON SHORE.
IT APPEARED TO BE PART OF A
PLANE WING.
AND NOW, IT'S BEING SENT TO A
FRENCH MILITARY LAB NEAR
TOULOUSE.
THAT'S WHERE AVIAONTI
INVESTIGATORS ARE HEADED TO
DETERMINE IF IT'S THE FIRST
TRACE OF WRECKAGE FROM THE
MISSING MALAYSIA AIRLINES
FLIGHT, MH-370.
MALAYSIA'S CHIEF OF CIVIL
AVIATION:
>> WE ARE GOING THERE, I'M
LEADING A TEAM TO TOULOUSE
TONIGHT, TO VERIFY AND
INVESTIGATE WHETHER THAT
PARTICULAR PART COMES FROM A
BOEING 777 OR IS IT COME FROM
THE MH-370, SO IT'S VERY
>> Woodruff: IT'S BEEN MORE THAN
A YEAR SINCE THE BOEING 777
DISAPPEARED.
THE PLANE WAS EN ROUTE FROM
KUALA LUMPUR TO BEIJING ON MARCH
8, 2014, BUT THEN TURNED SOUTH,
AND VANISHED FROM RADAR
SOMEWHERE OVER THE INDIAN OCEAN.
IT WAS CARRYING 239 PASSENGERS
AND CREW.
SINCE THEN, ITS DISAPPEARANCE
HAS REMAINED A MYSTERY.
DESPITE EXTENSIVE SEARCH
EFFORTS, NOTHING HAD BEEN FOUND,
LEAVING FAMILIES TO LINGER IN
UNCERTAINTY, AND FRUSTRATION.
UNCERTAINTY, AND FRUSTRATION. >>
(translated): THEY
CLAIM TO
>> (translated): THEY
CLAIM TO HAVE FOUND DEBRIS OF
THE MH-370
HAVE FOUND DEBRIS OF THE MH-370
ON AN ISLAND?
WE DON'T ACCEPT THIS, WE DO NOT
BELIEVE WHAT EY CTHLAIM, THE
FINDING DOES NOT CONSTITUTE
ANYTHING.
>> Woodruff: AUSTRALIA'S DEPUTY
PRIME MINSTER SAID THIS NEW
DISCOVERY COULD BE A MAJOR
BREAKTHROUGH, BUT ADDED:
>> IT'S BEEN IN THE WATER FOR A
YEAR AND A HALF NOW AND IT'S
MOVED, OBVIOUSLY, A CONSIDERABLE
DISTANCE.
SO, IT WON'T BE ALL THAT HELPFUL
IN PINPOINTING PRECISELY WHERE
THE AIRCRAFT MIGHT BE LOCATED,
BUT IF THIS WRECKAGE IS LINKED
TO MH-370, IT'LL CERTAINLY
CONFIRM THAT THE AIRCRAFT HAS
GONE INTO THE WATER IN THE
INDIAN OCEAN AREA.
>> Woodruff: IT MAY BE MORE THAN
A WEEK BEFORE INVESTIGATORS ARE
ABLE TO DETERMINE THAT.
THE DISCOVERY OF THE DEBRIS
RAISES MANY QUESTIONS AND WE
LOOK AT SOME OF THEM NOW WITH
VAN GURLEY, A RETIRED NAVAL
OCEANOGRAPHER WHOSE COMPANY,
METRON, HELPED INVESTIGATORS
EVENTUALLY FIND AIR FRANCE
FLIGHT 447 AFTER IT CRASHED IN
THE OCEAN OFF THE COAST OF SOUTH
AMERICA.
AND, MILES O'BRIEN, OUR SCIENCE
CORRESPONDENT AND A PILOT
HIMSELF WHO CLOSELY WATCHES THE
WORLD OF AVIATION.
GENTLEMEN, WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
MILES, I'M GOING TO START WITH
YOU.
HOW DEFINITIVE, THEN, IS IT THAT
THIS PLANE PIECE COMES FROM THAT
BOEING 777?
>> JUDY, I'D PUT IT IN THE HIGH
90 PERCENTILE.
THIS IS ABSOLUTELY, DEFINITELY A
PIECE OF A TRIPLE-7.
THREES ONLY ONE TRIPLE-7 MISSING
IN THE WORLD, MUCH LESS THE
INDIAN OCEAN, AND THERE THE
PIECE IS.
SO WHAT REMAINS TO BE DONE IS
DOT THE I'S, CROSS THE T'S, GET
THE SERIAL NUMBERS.
EVERY PART OF A PLANE HAS A
SERIAL NUMBER AND A LONG
PEDIGREE ATTACHED TO IT.
IT'S A LOT OF PAPERWORK AND IS
GOING TO TAKE A LITTLE BIT OF
TIME TO SAY ABSOLUTELY
DEFINITIVELY.
>> Woodruff: I KNOW YOU HAVE
BEEN WATCHING THE STORY SINCE
THE NEWS BROKE LAST NIGHT.
LOOKING AT WHAT WE KNOW SO FAR,
WHAT DOES IT TELL YOU?
>> WELL, IT'S INTERESTING, THE
WAY THE DAMAGE PATTERN PRESENTS
ITSELF IS INTERESTING.
A LOT OF PEOPLE HAVE BEEN
SAYING, PERHAPS IT FELL OFF AS
THE AIRCRAFT STRUCK THE WATER.
BUT I HAVE BEEN TALKING TO SOME
EXPERTS WHO HAVE LOOKED AT IT
AND SAID TWO THINGS THAT ARE
INTERESTING -- THE LEADING EDGE
IS NOT VERY DAMAGED AT ALL, AND
THE TRAILING EDGE, IF YOU LOOK
AT IT, ALMOST LOOKS LIKE IT'S
BEEN TORN LIKE A PIECE OF PAPER.
THAT WOULD INDICATE STRESS
DAMAGE.
IN OTHER WORDS, IT COULD HAVE
BEEN FLUTTERING, AND THAT WOULD
SUGGEST THAT IT TORE OFF IN
FLIGHT.
SO PERHAPS THIS AIRCRAFT WAS
HIGH RATE OF SPEED, AND PIECES
OF IT BEFORE FALLING OFF.
>> Woodruff: THAT'S STILL
SPECULATION AT THIS POINT?
>> IT IS, BUT THE DAMAGE PATTERN
SUPPORTS THAT.
>> Woodruff: VAN GURLEY, BASED
ON WHAT YOU KNOW FROM LOOKING
FOR PLANE PARTS, KNOWING ABOUT
OCEAN CURRENTS, WHAT DOES THIS
TELL YOU?
I MEAN, WHAT WAS KNOWN ABOUT
WHERE THIS PLANE POSSIBLY WENT
DOWN AND THE FACT THIS MAY BE A
PART ALL THE WAY OVER CLOSE TO
MADAGASCAR?
>> THIS BEGINS TO ANSWER SOME OF
THE BIG W QUESTION PLAGUING US
SINCE THE BEGINNING.
FIRST, WHAT HAPPENED TO THIS
FLIGHT?
IF THIS, IN FACT, IS TRACED BACK
TO THE MALAYSIAN AIR 370
AIRCRAFT, THIS SAYS THE PLANE
CRASHED AT SEA AND PROVIDES THE
ABILITY FOR THOSE FAMILIES TO
GET THE CLOSURE THEY HAVE BEEN
LOOKING FOR SINCE IT BEGAN.
THE SECOND QUESTION IT ANSWERED
IS WHERE WOULD IT HAVE CRASHED.
NOW, EVERYBODY WOULD LOVE, AND I
WOULD LOVE TO BE ABLE TO SAY WE
WOULD BE ABLE TO USE SOME
SCIENTIFIC METHOD AND SAY
BECAUSE WE FOUND IT HERE, IT
MUST HAVE BEEN HERE.
THE SCIENCE DOESN'T SUPPORT THAT
TYPE OF ACCURACY, BUT WHAT IT
DOES TELL US, IF WE LOOK AT THE
OCEAN CURRENTS IN THE INDIAN
OCEAN, IS IF THIS IS, IN FACT,
FROM AN MH370, THAT THE PLANE
DEFINITELY WENT DOWN IN THE
INDIAN OCEAN AND MOST LIKELY IN
THE EASTERN TO SOUTHEASTERN
INDIAN OCEAN.
SO THAT BEGINS TO SORT OF DRAW
CIRCLES AND NARROW DOWN SOME OF
THE WILDER SPECULATION THAT'S
BEEN OUT THERE FOR THE LAST YEAR
AND A HALF.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT THE
BARNICLES THEY'VE SHOWN THAT ARE
ON THIS FLAPPER-ON, THIS PART OF
THE WING?
>> THAT IS VERY STRONG EVIDENCE
THIS PART HAS BEEN AT SEA FOR
QUITE A WHILE.
IT'S NOT SOMETHING LOST OFF A
TRANSPORT SHIP LAST WEEK AND
JUST HAPPENED TO WASH UP ON THIS
BEACH.
FOR THAT TYPE OF MARINE GROWTH
TO ACCUMULATE MEANS THE PIECE
HAS BEEN FLOATING OUT AT SEA FOR
A WHILE.
I THINK THE MARINE BIOLOGISTS,
IF THEY GET A CHANCE TO LOOK AT
IT K START LOOKING AT HOW MUCH
GROWTH IS THERE AND PROVIDE A
BETTER ESTIMATE OF HOW LONG IT
MUST HAVE BEEN AT SEA FOR THAT
TO HAVE HAPPENED.
>> Woodruff: MILES, WHAT ARE
THE QUESTIONS YOU AND OTHERS WHO
LOOK AT AVIATION AND AVIATION
SAFETY HAVE GOING FORWARD?
HOW MUCH DOES THIS NARROW ON OUR
UNDERSTANDING OF WHAT COULD HAVE
HAPPENED?
>> WELL, YOU CAN LEARN A LOT
FROM THE PIECES, THE WRECKAGE.
IT CAN TELL A REAL STORY FOR US.
WHAT EXACTLY HAPPENED?
DID IT BREAK UP IN FLIGHT?
WAS THERE A FIRE OR EXPLOSION?
THE PIECES CAN ACTUALLY TELL YOU
THIS KIND OF INFORMATION.
ULTIMATELY, HOWEVER, THE ONLY
ANSWERS ARE AT THE BOTTOM OF THE
SEA AND, HOPEFULLY, THIS WILL
HELP PEOPLE AT LEAST HAVE THE
CONFIDENCE TO KNOW THAT, LOOKING
IN THE RIGHT PART OF THE WORLD,
THAT ON THAT CIRCLE THAT VAN WAS
REFERRING TO ON THE MAP, THERE
IS SOME DEGREE OF CONFIDENCE
THAT THEY'RE LOOKING IN THAT
PRECISE PLACE WITHIN PLUS OR
MINUS A FEW MILES, WHEREAS THERE
WAS ALL THIS CONCERN THAT
PERHAPS, AFTER THAT LAST
COMMUNICATION WITH THE
SATELLITE, IT MIGHT HAVE GLIDED
ON FOR SOME SEVERAL DOZENS OR
EVEN CLOSE TO 100 MILES, MAKING
THE SEARCH MUCH LESS ACCURATE.
SO I THINK THIS HELPS MAKE THE
SEARCH MORE ACCURATE AND
ULTIMATELY MIGHT GET US TO SOME
ANSWERS.
>> Woodruff: VAN VARNTION WHAT
ABOUT IN TERMS -- VAN GURLEY,
WHAT ABOUT IN TERMS OF PARTS OF
THE PLANE THAT WOULD FLOAT AND
PARTS THAT WOULD SINK?
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT THAT?
>> SO, AGAIN, DEPENDING ON HOW
THE AIRCRAFT IS CONSTRUCTED, IF
THERE'S AIR VOIDS AND POCKETS,
FOAM INSERTS, THOSE TYPES OF
THINGS, THEN THE PARTS WOULD
TEND TO STAY ON THE SURFACE FOR
A LONGER PERIOD OF TIME.
ONE OF THE THINGS I THINK I
ALREADY READ IN THE REPORTING
IS, IF YOU FIND ONE PIECE, ARE
THERE MORE SOMEWHERE IN THAT
PART OF THE OCEAN.
EVERY PART MOVES DIFFERENTLY IN
THE OCEAN CURRENTS AND THE WIND
IS A VERY COMPLEX PATTERN, SO
MIGHT FIND MORE ON THE SAME
BEACH, BUT A HIGH INDICATION, IF
THINGSER ARE GOING TO WASH UP,
YOU WOULD WANT TO LOOK AROUND
MADAGASCAR AND THE ISLANDS AND
DOWN OFF THE WESTERN COAST OF
THE SOUTHERN PART OF AFRICA.
SO LOOKING FOR MORE PIECES,
PARTS MIGHT HELP TO BACKTRACK
AND MAKE THAT -- REFINE WHAT
MILES WAS TALKING ABOUT, HELP
NARROW THE SEARCH AREA, BUT IT
STILL WILL BE A LONG PROCESS.
>> Woodruff: QUICKLY, MILES,
THE NEXT THINGS THAT HAVE TO
HAPPEN ARE WHAT, BROADENING THE
SEARCH IN THAT AREA?
>> EXACTLY.
KEEP PLOWING THROUGH THE OCEAN
ALONG THAT CIRCLE THAT WAS DRAWN
BY THAT SATELLITE THAT GAVE THEM
A BASIC IDEA, A BIG SWATH OF
OCEAN TO BE SURE, BUT THIS HELPS
THEM HAVE THAT CONFIDENCE AND WE
HOPE WE CAN FIND MORE DEBRIS.
>> Woodruff: MILES O'BRIEN,
VAN GURLEY, IT'S EARLY AT LEAST
AT THIS STAGE OF THE STORY.
WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
YOU'RE WELCOME:
>> Ifill: THIS IS NOT THE FIRST
TIME THE CITY OF CINCINNATI HAS
BEEN CAUGHT IN THE CROSSWINDS OF
AN OFFICER-INVOLVED SHOOTING.
THE LAST TIME, HOWEVER, WAS IN
2001.
AND THE CITY HAS SINCE BEEN
CONSIDERED AN EXAMPLE OF HOW TO
RECOVER FROM COMMUNITY UNREST.
BUT AFTER THE KILLING OF SAMUEL
DuBOSE, THOSE LESSONS MAY NOW
HAVE TO BE RELEARNED.
TENSING PLEADED NOT GURY
MANSLAUGHTER.
JUDGE MEGAN SHANAHAN SET HIS
BOND AT $1 MILLION, AND MUCH OF
THE COURTROOM BROKE INTO
APPLAUSE.
>> LADIES AND GENTLEMEN, THIS IS
A COURTROOM, YOU WILL CONDUCT
YOURSELVES AT ALL TIMES
APPROPRIATELY.
>> Ifill: TENSING'S ATTORNEY,
STEWART MATHEWS:
>> THERE ARE TWO SIDES TO THIS
THING.
TH CASEE WILL ULTIMATELY BE
TRIED AND DECIDED AIN
COURTROOM, AND THAT THAT
VIDEOTAPE IS SUBJECT TO MORE
THAN THE INTERPRETATION THAT'S
BEEN PUT OUT THERE BY THE
PROSECUTOR.
>>fill I: THAT VIDEOTAPE IS THE
MUCH-VIEWED FOOTAGE FROM
TENSING'S BODY CAMERA, TAPED
DURING THE JULY 19th TRAFFIC
STOP THAT ENDED WITH TENSING
SHOOTING DuBOSE IN THE HEAD,
KILLING HIM INSTANTLY.
TENSING, WHO IS WHITE, HAS SAID
"HE FEARED FOR HIS LIFE," AND
AUDIO OF HIS INITIAL ACCOUNT WAS
CAPTURED AFTER HE KILLED DuBOSE,
>> Ifill: PROSECUTORS HAVE
SCOFFED AT THAT CLAIM, BUT
DEFENSE ATTORNEY MATTHEWS HAS
POINTED OUT THAT FOOTAGE FROM A
SECOND OFFICER'S CAMERA SHOWS
TENSING ON THE GROUND.
OUTSIDE THE COURTROOM TODAY, A
FRIEND OF SAMUEL DuBOSE
PROCLAIMED, "THEY CAN SHOOT ME
IN MY HEAD TOO" IF TENSING'S NOT
CONVICTED.
>> HE WASN'T IN FEAR OF HIS
LIFE.
YOU SEE HOW HUMBLE MY BROTHER
WAS?
MY BROTHER DON'T EVEN RAISE HIS
VOICE.
HE PANICKED WHEN HE SEEN THAT
GUN. "HE GOT A GUN!
I GOT MY HANDS UP!"
AND HE SHOT HIM COLD BLOODED IN
THE HEAD.
>> Ifill: TODAY'S ARRAIGNMENT
FOLLOWS A PEACEFUL RALLY IN
DOWNTOWN CINCINNATI LAST NIGHT.
HUNDREDS TOOK PART IN THE "BLACK
LIVES MATTER" PROTEST, CHANTING
SLOGANS LIKE "HANDS UP, DON'T
SHOOT," A PHRASE COINED NEARLY A
YEAR AGO AFTER KILLING OF
MICHAEL BROWN, IN FERGUSON,
MISSOURI.
RAY TENSING'S NEXT COURT DATE IS
SET FOR AUGUST 19th.
>> Ifill: JOINING ME NOW TO
DISCUSS THE FALLOUT FROM THE
SHOOTING AND INDICTMENT, IS
CINCINNATTI
POLICE CHIEF JEFFREY BLACKWELL.
HE HAS BEEN A DRIVING FORCE
BEHIND MANY OF THE CHANGES THAT
HAVE TAKEN PLACE IN THAT CITY IN
THE YEARS SINCE ANOTHER
OFFICER-INVOLVED SHOOTING
TRIGGERED 5 DAYS OF RIOTS IN
WELCOME, CHIEF BLACKWELL.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Ifill: BETWEEN 1999 AND
2014, CINCINNATI HAD A DROP IN
OFFICER-INVOLVED CASES, I THINK
69%, I SAW, OF USE OF FORCE.
WHAT'S HAPPENED?
WHAT CHANGED?
DID THIS BING BACKWARD?
>> I THINK WHAT HAPPENED -- AND
I WASN'T HERE.
I WAS IN COLUMN AT THE TIME.
BUT AFTER THE COLLABORATIVE
AGREEMENT AND THE CIVIL UNREST
IN 2001, WE CHANGED OUR
STRATEGIC AND OUR OPERATIONAL
PLATFORM, IF YOU WILL.
WE SIGNED AN HISTORIC,
COLLABORATIVE AGREEMENT THAT
INVOLVED THE COMMUNITY, CLERGY,
PROSECUTORS, JUDGES AND POLICE
OFFICERS.
I DON'T THINK ANY OTHER CITY HAS
ENGAGED OR ENCOUNTERED THIS TYPE
OF DOCUMENT SINCE THEN.
I THINK THAT'S BEEN THE DRIVING
FORCE TO THE CULTURE CHANGE IN
CINCINNATI POLICING.
>> Ifill: WELL, AND I WANT TO
BE CLEAR AND FAIR THAT THE
OFFICER INVOLVED IN THIS LATEST
SHOOTING IS NOT A CITY OF
CINCINNATI POLICE OFFICER BUT A
UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI POLICE
OFFICER, BUT IT STILL MUST STIR
YOU HAVE A LOT OF BAD FEELINGS
AND FAMILIAR OLD FEELINGS.
WHAT HAS BEEN THE COMMUNITY
REACTION THUS FAR?
>> IT HAS, YOU'RE RIGHT, GWEN.
IT HAS STIRRED UP THOSE FEELINGS
AND, QUITE NATURALLY, WE WERE
CONCERNED THAT WE WOULD HAVE
THAT SYMPATHETIC REFLEX, JUST
LIKE COMMUNITIES HAD OR HAVE NOW
AFTER INCIDENTS IN BALTIMORE AND
CLEVELAND AND FERGUSON AND OTHER
CITIES IN OUR NATION.
WE'VE SEEN ONE EGREGIOUS ACT
AFTER ANOTHER, UNFORTUNATELY IN
POLICING.
MAKE NO MISTAKE ABOUT IT, WE ARE
IN THE MOST DIFFICULT POLICING
ENVIRONMENT IN THIS NATION AND
99% OF THE POLICE OFFICERS
PERFORM ADMIRABLY, THEY DO A
WONDERFUL JOB EVERY DAY WITH
COMPASSION AND CHARACTER.
BUT WHEN WE MAKE MISTAKES, THEY
ARE MAGNIFIED LIKE NEVER BEFORE,
AND I AM PLEASED THAT, WHEN THIS
MISTAKE HAPPENED IN OUR CITY BY
A UNIVERSITY OFFICER HERE, IT
WAS DEALT WITH APPROPRIATELY AND
IN A TIMELY FASHION.
>> Ifill: LET ME ASK YOU ABOUT
THE APPROPRIATENESS OF HOW IT
WAS DEALT WITH.
WE SAW THE VIDEO FOOTAGE, WE
HEARD ABOUT THE BODY CAMERA THAT
THE OFFICER WAS WEARING.
DID THIS PROVE TO YOU THAT BODY
CAMERAS HELP TO GET TO A
RESOLUTION MORE QUICKLY OR DID
IT PROVE THAT BODY CAMERAS DON'T
STOP THIS SORT OF THING FROM
HAPPENING?
>> NO, I THINK THE FIRST, GWEN.
I THINK IT ABSOLUTELY PROVES
THAT BODY CAMERAS SHOULD BE A
REQUIRED PIECE OF EQUIPMENT FOR
POLICE OFFICERS IN THIS NATION,
AND WE ARE IN THE PROCESS HERE
AT CINCINNATI P.D. OF TRYING TO
IMPLEMENT A BODY CAMERA PLATFORM
OURSELVES.
BODY CAMERAS HELP IN TWO
ASPECTS, THEY MAKE THE POLICE
OFFICER BEHAVE MORE
PROFESSIONALLY, BUT THEY ALSO
MAKE THE CITIZEN BEHAVE MORE
APPROPRIATELY AS WELL, AND THEN
THEY GIVE US THE MUCH-NEEDED
EVIDENCE THAT IS CRITICAL IN
SITUATIONS LIKE THIS.
CANDIDLY, I'M NOT SURE THAT THIS
WOULD HAVE RESULTED IN AN
INDICTMENT, HAD WE NOT HAD THAT
BODY CAMERA FOOTAGE.
>> Ifill: YOU HAVE SAID, IN
THE PAST -- BECAUSE YOU'VE
ADVISED OTHER CITIES IN THESE
SITUATIONS -- YOU'VE SAID IN THE
PAST THERE IS A CULTURAL
DISCONNECT AND THAT RACISM IS
OFTEN AT THE ROOT OF SOME OF
THESE CONFLICTS.
DO YOU THINK THAT'S THE CASE
HERE AS WELL?
>> YOU KNOW, I THINK IT'S A
COMBINATION OF THINGS, GWEN.
I THINK, FIRST AND FOREMOST, IS
THAT THE OFFICER LACKED THE
NECESSARY TRAINING FROM A
BASELINE LEVEL, AS WELL AS THE
CULTURAL COMPETENCY TRAINING, TO
BE ENGAGED IN URBAN POLICING.
OUR COMMUNITY IS VERY URBAN.
THE UNIVERSITY OF CINCINNATI
SITS IN AN URBAN SPACE IN OUR
CITY AND, BY COMING OUT OF THE
UNIVERSITY AREA AND GOING DOWN
INTO ONE OF OUR NEIGHBORHOODS, I
THINK IT'S A RECIPE FOR DISASTER
WHEN THESE OFFICERS DON'T QUITE
UNDERSTAND HOW WE POLICE IN THE
CITY, AND IT PLAYED OUT IN A
VERY NEGATIVE WAY.
>> Ifill: THE PROSECUTORS SAID
YESTERDAY AMONG THE OTHER THINGS
THAT THIS INDIVIDUAL PERHAPS
SHOULD NOT HAVE BEEN A POLICE
OFFICER.
>> WELL, YOU KNOW, I DON'T KNOW.
I HAVEN'T HAD A CHANCE TO DELVE
INTO HIS PERSONNEL FILE OR HIS
BACKGROUND HISTORY, BUT I WILL
SAY THIS -- POLICING IN A BIG
CITY IN THIS NATION IS FAR
DIFFERENT THAN POLICING ON A
UNIVERSITY CAMPUS OR A RURAL
COMMUNITY, ESPECIALLY A CITY
LIKE CINCINNATI THAT UNDERSTANDS
THE PROPER WAY TO POLICE.
WE PLACE ENGAGEMENT HIGH ON OUR
LIST OVER ENFORCEMENT.
WE ARE ENGAGED WITH OUR
COMMUNITY.
WE BELIEVE IN TRANSPARENCY AND
RELATIONSHIP AND TRUTH TELLING.
I REMEMBER BEING WITH YOU IN
FERGUSON SEVERAL MONTHS AGO AND
I SAID, WHEN YOU HAVE COMMUNITY
ENGAGEMENT, YOU GET WHAT I CALL
RELATIONSHIP COLLATERAL.
I THINK YOU'VE SEEN THAT PLAY
OUT HERE IN OUR COMMUNITY SINCE
THIS VERDICT.
WE WERE EXPECTING PROBLEMS.
I THINK OTHER PARTS OF THE
NATION WERE LOOKING AT
CINCINNATI THINKING THAT WE
WOULD TURN INTO A BALTIMORE OR A
CLEVELAND THAT HAVE EXPERIENCED
CIVIL UNREST, BUT WE DIDN'T.
WE DID NOT, AND I'M VERY PROUD
OF OUR CITY.
I'M VERY PROUD OF THE PEACE THAT
PREVAILED IN CINCINNATI LAST
NIGHT.
>> Ifill: YET YOU'VE SAID
EVERY CITY IS ONE INCIDENT AWAY
FROM A FERGUSON OR BALTIMORE OR
CLEVELAND, BUT NOT CINCINNATI?
>> YOU KNOW, I HOPE NOT, GWEN.
I WAS WORRIED.
I HAVE TO BE HONEST, I HAVEN'T
SLEPT IN A COUPLE OF DAYS, AND I
DO BELIEVE THAT EVERY CITY
INCLUDING MY CITY HERE IS ONE
INCIDENT AWAY.
IF IT'S A BAD INCIDENT AND IT'S
NOT DEALT WITH APPROPRIATELY.
FIRST AND FOREMOST, WE HOPE, IN
POLICING, EVERY CHIEF THAT I
KNOW HOPES THAT THEY'RE NOT
SITTING HERE TALKING TO YOU
ABOUT A RIOT IN THEIR CITY BASED
ON INAPPROPRIATE POLICE CONDUCT.
BUT THE OTHER PIECE THAT I THINK
THE NATION IS REALLY HONED IN ON
IS THAT, IF WE DO HAVE POLICE
MISCONDUCT, WE NEED TO BE HELD
ACCOUNTABLE FOR OUR ACTIONS.
WEE TO STOP THIS SHROUD
OF SECRECY AROUND POLICING AND
WE'VE GOT TO BE TRUTHFUL IN OUR
INVESTIGATIONS ON POLICE
OFFICERS.
>> Ifill: CINCINNATI CHIEF OF
POLICE JEFFREY BLACKWELL, THANK
YOU.
>> THANK YOU, GWEN.
>> Woodruff: STAY WITH US,
COMING UP ON THE NEWSHOUR:
MAKING SENSE OF HOW ROBOTS ARE
CHANGING THE ECONOMY.
HITTING THE ROAD TO HIGHLIGHT
CRUMBLING INFRASTRUCTURE.
OLYMPIC ATHLETES FORCED TO
COMPETE IN SEWAGE WATER.
AND, PERFORMANCE ARTIST MARINA
ABRAMOVIC ON CONNECTING WITH HER
AUDIENCE.
BUT FIRST, THE PENTAGON HAS
DENIED REPORTS THAT AL-QAEDA
LINKED FIGHTERS HAVE ABDUCT
SEVERAL U.S. TRAINED SYRIAN
REBELS OUTSIDE OF ALEPPO, SYRIA.
THE SYRIAN OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN
RIGHTS STATED THAT THE MEN WERE
TAKEN BY MEMBERS OF THE AL NUSRA
FRONT.
IN MAY, THE U.S. MILITARY
LAUNCHED A PROGRAM TO TRAIN UP
TO 5,000 SO-CALLED MODERATE
REBELS PER YEAR.
SO FAR, THEY'RE NOWHERE NEAR
THAT NUMBER.
SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT JANE
FERGUSON CAUGHT UP WITH ONE OF
THE FEW FIGHTERS WHO HAS BEEN
TRAINED BY THE U.S., IN SOUTHERN
TURKEY.
>> Reporter: IN THE WORLD
OUTSIDE SYRIA, MOHAMMED SEEMS
NERVOUS.
HE HAS GOOD REASON.
AS A FREE SYRIAN ARMY COMMANDER,
HE AND HIS MEN ARE WAITING TO
SEE IF FOREIGN INTERVENTION WILL
CHANGE THE DIRECTION OF THE WAR.
HE SAYS HE HAS ALREADY BEEN
TRAINED BY AMERICANS.
>> (translated): IN THE
BEGINNING THEY ASKED FOR OUR
THREE NAMES.
OUR FIRST NAME, SURNAME, AND
FATHER'S NAME.
WE GAVE OUR NAMES AND PICTURES.
THERE WERE ABOUT 100 OF US.
THEY TOOK US TO THE CAMP, THEY
TRAINED US FOR 50 DAYS IN
WORKING WITH GUNS.
THE TRAINING WAS VERY GOOD.
THEY TAUGHT US HOW TO USE SOME
OF THE WEAPONS WE WEREN'T
FAMILIAR WITH.
ADVANCED WEAPONRY, LIKE ROCKETS.
>> Reporter: MOHAMMED SAYS HE
HAS SEEN AND SPOKEN WITH
AMERICANS INSIDE SYRIA, WHO WERE
COORDINATING AIR STRIKES.
>> THEY WERE TELLING US, THESE
ARE THE LINES WHICH YOU SHOULD
NOT CROSS OR THE AIR STRIKES
WILL HIT YOU.
>> Reporter: NOW, A NEW DEAL
BETWEEN TURKEY AND THE U.S.
COULD PUSH THE ISLAMIC STATE
AWAY FROM TURKEY'S BORDER.
AMERICAN AIR STRIKES AGAINST
ISIS WILL NOW BE LAUNCHED FROM
TURKISH SOIL.
THE IDEA BEING, IF ISIS PULLS
BACK, FIGHTERS LIKE MOHAMMED
COULD THEN MOVE IN.
HE WAS INJURED IN BATTLE AND
TREATED IN HOSPITAL IN TURKEY,
BUT IS EAGER TO GET BACK TO THE
FIGHT.
FIGHT. >> (translated
): I WILL RETURN
>> (translated): I WILL
RETURN TO MY COUNTRY AND I WILL
FIGHT
TO MY COUNTRY AND I WILL FIGHT
THERE, EVEN IF I WERE TO BE
KILLED THERE.
>> Reporter: REFUGEES LIVING IN
TURKEY COULD TECHNICALLY MOVE
BACK TO THE ISIS-FREE AREA TOO.
ALI LEFT ALEPPO TWO YEARS AGO
AND NOW RUNS A RESTAURANT IN
TURKEY.
HE WOULD MOVE BACK TO A SAFE
AREA IN SYRIA IF HE COULD.
AREA IN SYRIA IF HE COULD. >> (
translated): OF COURSE,
OF
>> (translated): OF
COURSE, OF COURSE.
COURSE.
THIS IS HOW EVERY SYRIAN FEELS.
OUR HOMELAND IS VERY PRECIOUS TO
US.
THE MINUTE THE WAR ENDS, EVEN IF
ALL OF TURKEY BELONGED TO ME, I
WOULD GO BACK TO SYRIA.
>> Reporter: BUT NOT EVERYONE IS
CONFIDENT ABOUT RETURNING.
SOME REFUGEES WORRY AUT WBOHO
WILL REPLACE ISIS.
JUST TWO WEEKS AGO, NOUR AND HER
FAMILY CROSSED OVER TO TURKEY,
FLEEING ISIS-HELD TERRITORY.
SHE SAYS SIMPLY CLEARING AN AREA
OF ISIS WOULD NOT BE ENOUGH TO
CONVINCE HER TO BACGOK UNLESS
HER SAFETY IS GUARANTEED.
HER SAFETY IS GUARANTEED. >> (
translated): EVEN APART
>> (translated): EVEN
APART FROM ISIS, THERE ARE MANY
GROUPS
FROM ISIS, THERE ARE MANY GROUPS
WHO DO BAD THINGS.
I'M AFRAID OF ALL THOSE GROUPS.
MANY PEOPLE HAVE BEEN KILLED BY
THEM.
>> Reporter: THERE ARE ALSO NO
GUARANTEES PEOPLE IN ISIS-FREE
AREAS WOULD BE SAFE FROM SYRIAN
GOVERNMENT WARPLANES.
GOVERNMENT WARPLANES. >> (
translated): EVEN IF
ISIS
>> (translated): EVEN
IF ISIS ARE PUSHED OUT WE STILL
WOULD
ARE PUSHED OUT WE STILL WOULD
NOT RETURN UNTIL THE ASSAD
REGIME IS FINISHED.
BECAUSE THE SYRIAN REGIME BOMBS
US WITH AIR STRIKES, THEY KILL
MANY OF US, WE KNOW MANY WHO
DIED THIS WAY.
>> Reporter: IT'S NOT YET CLEAR
WHAT KIND OF TROOPS WOULD HOLD
THE GROUND IN ANY BUFFER ZONE OR
AREA THAT ISIS HAVE BEEN CLEARED
FROM.
TURKEY HAS ALREADY SAID THAT IT
WILL NOT BE SENDING IN GROUND
TROOPS, AND THEY ARE UNLIKELY TO
ALLOW KURDISH REBELS TO TAKE
THAT TERRITORY.
WITH FEW OPTIONS LEFT FOR
REPLACING ISIS, THOSE WHO DO
COULD END UP BEING EXTREMIST
ISLAMIST FIGHTERS.
THE DEAL BETWEEN TURKEY AND THE
U.S. TO STEP UP AIR STRIKES
AGAINST ISIS OVER THE BORDER IS
BEING HERALDED AS THE BEST HOPE
YET TO TAKE TERRITORY FROM THE
GROUP.
HOLDING ON TO THAT LAND
AFTERWARDS COULD BE AN EVEN
GREATER CHALLENGE.
JANE FERGUSON, PBS NEWSHOUR,
EASTERN TURKEY.
>> Ifill: WE'VE SHOWN YOU BEFORE
THE RISING ROLE THAT AUTOMATION
AND ROBOTS PLAY IN SOME PARTS OF
THE WORKFORCE.
TONIGHT, WE HAVE A MORE SOBERING
AND PERHAPS SOMEWHAT EERIER
PICTURE OF HOW THOSE TRENDS ARE
GATHERING FORCE, MORE QUCKLY
THAN ANTICIPATED.
ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT, PAUL
SOLMAN, LOOKS AT THE PROMISE AND
PERILS OF THE RISE OF THE ROBOT,
PART OF OUR WEEKLY SERIES,
"MAKING SENSE", WHICH AIRS EVERY
THURSDAY ON THE NEWSHOUR.
>> Reporter: THE 11th HOLE AT
STANFORD UNIVERSITY.
CHAD GRAY'S AN OKAY GOLFER, BUT
HIS CADDY IS REALLY HARD TO
BEAT.
>> IT'S GONNA GO WHEREVER YOU
WANT IT GO.
IT FOLLOWS YOU LIKE A PUPPY DOG.
>> Reporter: MEET THE ROBOT
CADDY TREK.
>> IT HAS TWO ULTRASOUND BARS
THAT SEND A SIGNAL BACK TO THE
REMOTE THAT'S ON MY BACK POCKET
HERE.
>> IT'S AN INCREDIBLY SIMPLE
PIECE OF TECHNOLOGY.
>> Reporter: BUT THE
IMPLICATIONS FOR AMERICA'S
CADDIES, AND MILLIONS OF OTHER
WORKERS, ARE OMINOUS, SAYS
COMPUTER SCIEIST NTAND SERIAL
ENTREPRENEUR JERRY KAPLAN.
KAPLAN HAS HIS OWN LABOR-SAVING
SCHLEPPER, AN R2-D2 DESIGNED TO
MAKE LOCAL DELIVERIES.
>> THIS IS THE STANFORD JACK
RABBOT.
>> Reporter: JACK RABBOT.
>> YES.
>> Reporter: AS IN ROBOT.
>> THAT'S RIGHT, IT'S LIKE A
JACKRABBIT, BUT IT'S A ROBOT.
IT'S DESIGNED TO OPERATE IN
SOCIALLY APPROPRIATE WAYS IN
PEDESTRIAN SPACES.
>> Reporter: JACK LOOKS HARMLESS
ENOUGH.
BUT HE, LIKE CADDY TREK, IS THE
SHAPE OF THINGS TO COME.
>> WE'RE ABOUT TO SEE A
SIGNIFICANT INCREASE IN THE
ACCELERATION OF THE RATE IN
AUTOMATION.
>> Reporter: AND THE AGE-OLD
FEAR OF DISPLACED WORKERS, SAYS
KAPLAN, IS FINALLY, IRREVOCABLY
UPON US.
>> WHAT HAPPENS TO PEOPLE WHO
SIMPLY CAN'T ACQUIRE OR DON'T
HAVE THE SKILLS THAT ARE GOING
TO BE NEEDED IN THE NEW ECONOMY?
>> Reporter: WELL, WHAT IS GOING
TO HAPPEN TO THEM?
>> WE'RE GOING TO SEE MUCH WORSE
INCOME INEQUALITY AND UNLESS WE
TAKE SOME HUMANITARIAN ACTIONS,
THE TRUTH IS THEY'RE GOING TO
STARVE AND LIVE IN POVERTY AND
DIE.
>> Reporter: KAPLAN OFFERS THAT
GRIM PROGNOSIS IN A NEW BOOK,
"HUMANS NEED NOT APPLY."
HE KNOWS, OF COURSE, THAT
AUTOMATION HAS BEEN REPLACING
LABOR FOR 200 YEARS OR MORE; FOR
DECADES, ELIMINATING RELATIVELY
HIGH-PAYING FACTORY JOBS IN
AMERICA, AND THAT NEW JOBS HAVE
MORE THAN KEPT PACE.
BUT NOT ANYMORE, HE SAYS.
YOU'RE THE GUY FROM THE SAME DAY
DELIVERY PIECE!
NOW BY PURE CHANCE, A CASE IN
POINT HAPPENED TO NOTICE JACK
RABBOT BEING PUT THROUGH HIS
PACES.
WE'D MET MIKE CANNON A FEW
MONTHS EARLIER WHEN SHOOTING HIM
DELIVERING PACKAGES FOR GOOGLE
EXPRESS.
>> SO I'M DELIVERING DNA SAMPLES
TO ALL OF THE VARIOUS LABS ON
CAMPUS.
>> Reporter: YOU'RE JUST
WATCHING US SHOOT.
>> AND IT CAUGHT MY ATTENTION.
I THOUGHT THAT'S MY REPLACEMENT.
(LAUGHS)
>> HI I'M OSHBOT.
>> Reporter: AT A HARDWARE STORE
IN SILICON VALLEY, OSHBOT.
DOORKNOBS.
>> SURE.
FOLLOW ME.
A JOINT VENTURE BETWEEN THE
LOWE'S CHAIN OF STORES AND A
STARTUP CALLED FELLOW ROBOTS.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU SERIOUS?
AND, WITHOUT EVER NEEDING A
COFFEE OR BATHROOM BREAK, ITS
VOICE RECOGNITION SOFTWARE,
FLUENT IN MULTIPLE LANGUAGES,
AND LASER SENSOR SAFETY
THAN MANY OF AMERICA'S FIVE
MILLION OR SO RETAIL WORKERS.
>> MAYBE 50% OF THE RETAIL
CLERKS COULD BE REPLACED BY THIS
KIND OF TECHNOLOGY?
AND OF COURSE THIS IS JUST THE
BEGINNING.
>> Reporter: NOW OSHBOT'S
INVENTOR, MARCMASCO ORRO,
DISPUTES THAT HIS BABY WOULD PUT
ANYONE OUT OF WORK.
SO YOU DON'T SEE OSHBOT
REPLACING PEOPLE?
>> NO, I DON'T THINK SO.
I THINK THIS IS REALLY A TOOL
THAT HELPS PEOPLE FIND THINGS IN
A STORE WITH VERY SPECIFIC
INFORMATION.
>> Reporter: AND IF YOU THINK,
"WELL, OSHBOT STILL SEEMS A BIT
CLUNKY AS A REPLACEMENT FOR
HUMANS..."
AFTER YOU, KEMA.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Reporter: ...IN DOWNTOWN PALO
ALTO, SUITABLE TECHNOLOGY'S BEAM
TELE-PRESENCE ROBOT SELLS
ITSELF, WITH NO HUMANS ON SITE
AT ALL.
>> HI GUYS, HOW'S IT GOING?
>> GOOD, HOW ARE YOU?
>> BEAM IS A SMART PRESENCE
SYSTEM, SO IT ALLOWS US TO BEAM
IN ANYWHERE IN THE WORLD WITH A
WIFI CONNECTION AND MANEUVER
THIS DEVICE ON OUR KEYBOARDS
RE.HE
>> Reporter: TURN AROUND, WOULD
YOU?
DO A 360 FOR ME.
>> THE PROBLEM IN RETAIL IS
STAFFING.
YOU HAVE PEOPLE STANDING AROUND
IN THE STORES, OFTEN, JUST
WAITING FOR PEOPLE TO COME IN
AND THEN YOU'VE GOT CUSTOMERS AT
OTHER TIMES THAT ARE WAITING AND
CAN'T GET HELP.
>> Reporter: AND ALREADY, SAYS
TAYLOR SEWITT, BEAMING IN FROM
UPSTATE NEW YORK:
>> WE'VE HAD A COUPLE OF BANKS
ACTUALLY START TO USE THEM
WHERE, IF ALL OF A SUDDEN A
SECONDARY LOCATION GETS SWAMPED,
YOU COULD HAVE A COUPLE OF
TELLERS FROM THE FIRST LOCATION
ACTUALLY BEAM INTO THAT SECOND
LOCATION AND THAT INSTANTLY
DOUBLES THE STAFF WITHOUT
ACTUALLY DOUBLING THE STAFF AND
HIRING TWICE AS MANY PEOPLE.
>> Reporter: KEMA JOHNSON WAS IN
UTAH.
>> I SIT HERE IN THE DESERT
WHERE I WANT TO LIVE BUT I CAN
STILL WORK IN CALIFORNIA.
>> Reporter: IS THERE ANY
SENSITIVITY ON YOUR PART ABOUT
REPLACING PEOPLE?
>> I DON'T THINK IT'S AS MUCH
REPLACING PEOPLE.
WE DEFINITELY WANT TO STAY AWAY
FROM AUTOMATION BECAUSE SOMEBODY
NEEDS TO BE ON BEAM AT ALL
TIMES.
>> Reporter: WHAT DO YOU MEAN,
IT'S NOT AUTOMATION?
YOU'RE THE PERSONIFICATION OF
AUTOMATION!
>> ULTIMATELY FOR US WE'D LIKE
TO GIVE MORE JOBS TO PEOPLE THAT
THEY WOULDN'T NORMALLY BE ABLE
TO HAVE OR DO LIKE MYSELF AND
KEMA.
>> Reporter: BUT IF YOU'RE IN
UTAH AND YOU ARE SERVICING LOTS
OF CUSTOMERS IN MAYBE MULTIPLE
STORES, RIGHT.
>> CORRECT.
>> Reporter: YOU ARE REPLACING
THE JOBS OF PEOPLE WHO WOULD BE
IN THE STORES THEMSELVES.
ISN'T THAT JUST OBVIOUS?
>> A PERSON STILL NEEDS TO
OPERATE THE DEVICE.
WE'RE NOT ROBOTIC, SO TO SPEAK.
>> Reporter: ARE THEY BEING
DEFENSIVE ABOUT NOT REPLACING
JOBS?
>> YOU'RE TALKING TO TWO PEOPLE
THAT HAVE JOBS.
T GET A
JOB WORKING IN THIS STORE HERE
LOCALLY.
>> Reporter: I WAS ALSO NOT
INTERVIEWING THE HEADS OF
COMPANIES THAT PROVIDE ROBOTS AT
LOCAL HOTELS, ROBOTS THAT CAN
THIN OUT LEUCE TTCROPS.
>> THE REACTION PEOPLE HAVE HERE
SEEMS TO BE SIMILAR TO IF YOU
CALLED UP A TOBACCO COMPANY AND
SAID: I'D LIKE TO DO A STORY ON
SMOKING AND HEALTH.
>> Reporter: SO WHEN YOU CALLED
UP COMPANIES FOR THIS SHOOT TO
APPEAR ON THE PBS NEWSHOUR, THEY
SAID NOT IF IT'S ABOUT
DISPLACING LABOR?
>> I FOUND THAT DOORS WOULD
IMMEDIATELY SLAM SHUT.
OH NO, WE MAKE PEOPLE MORE
PRODUCTIVE.
WELL, MAKING PEOPLE MORE
PRODUCTIVE PUTS OTHER PEOPLE OUT
OF WORK.
>> Reporter: NOW IN FAIRNESS,
NOT EVERYONE IN THE VALLEY WAS
AFRAID TO ADMIT THAT ROBOTS ARE
LABOR-SAVING DEVICES.
ARE YOU OK WITH THE FACT THAT
THIS IS GOING TO REPLACE
THOUSANDS, MAYBE TENS OF
THOUSANDS OF CADDIES?
>> ABSOLUTELY.
AND THIS TECHNOLOGY CAN BE
APPLIED TO OTHER TYPES OF JOBS
AS WELL: PORTERS, BELLHOPS,
STOCKROOM CLERKS-- ANYWHERE
WHERE HEAVY LIFTING IS INVOLVED.
>> Reporter: OF COURSE, NEW JOBS
ARE BEING CREATED IN SILICON
VALLEY.
THAT'S WHY ENTREPRENEUR VIVEK
WADHWA CONFIDENTLY TOLD US THIS
IN 2012.
>> THE CONVERGENCE OF THESE
TECHNOLOGIES WILL CREATE JOBS IN
AREAS WE CAN'T EVEN THINK OF.
>> Reporter: BUT THESE DAYS
WADHWA IS SINGING A DIFFERENT,
DOLOROUS TUNE.
>> TECHNOLOGY'S MOVING FASTER
THAN ANYONE BELIEVES AND IT IS
GOING TO DISRUPT INDUSTRIES AND
CREATE UNEMPLOYMENT ON A SCALE
THAT WE HAVEN'T IMAGINED BEFORE.
>> Reporter: WHY DID YOU USED TO
THINK IT WASN'T GOING TO BE A
PROBLEM?
>> BECAUSE I BELIEVED WHAT
PEOPLE OF SILICON VALLEY DO,
THAT TECHNOLOGY WILL MAKE
EVERYTHING ALRIGHT.
I'VE HAD DEBATES WITH A WHO'S
WHO OF SILICON VALLEY, AND I SIT
BACK AND THINK: THESE PEOPLE
LIVE IN THEIR OWN WORLD.
THEY DON'T KNOW POVERTY; THEY
DON'T KNOW DESPAIR.
THEY DON'T KNOW WHAT THE IMPACT
OF UNEMPLOYMENT IS.
>> PEOPLE IN THE SILICON VALLEY
BELIEVE THAT WHAT WE'RE DOING IS
GOD'S WORK.
WE ARE MAKING THE WORLD A BETTER
PLACE.
>> Reporter: AROUND THE CORNER
FROM STANFORD'S ROBOTICS LAB,
THE UNIVERSITY'S WORLD CLASS ART
MUSEUM PROVIDED A LAST SYMBOLIC
STOP.
>> HERE WE ARE STANDING IN
PARADISE.
BUT WE'RE STANDING IN FRONT OF
RODIN'S THE GATES OF HELL.
>> Reporter: SO IN YOUR
DYSTOPIA, THERE ARE MILLIONS OF
AMERICANS WHO LITERALLY OUT OF
LUCK AND ARE FACING A GRIM
FUTURE BECAUSE THEY SIMPLY DON'T
HAVE THE SKILLS TO SELL IN THE
NEW ECONOMY.
>> I THINK THAT'S TRUE.
HERE'S THE GOOD NEWS: THE U.S.
ECONOMY HAS DOUBLED, RELIABLY,
ABOUT EVERY 40 YEARS FOR SEVERAL
HUNDRED YEARS NOW.
SO WHEN YOU LOOK OUT 40 YEARS
FROM NOW, WE'RE GOING TO HAVE
TWICE AS MUCH WEALTH AS WE HAVE
TODAY.
THE QUESTION IS WHO'S GOING TO
GET THAT WEALTH?
IS IT GOING TO BE CONCENTRATED
IN THE HANDS OF AN ELITE, OR IS
IT GOING TO BE DISTRIBUTED MORE
WIDELY?
>> Reporter: GOOD QUESTION.
THIS IS ECONOMICS CORRESPONDENT
PAUL SOLMAN, REPORTING IN AS
HUMAN A WAY AS IS STILL POSSIBLE
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR FROM
SILICON VALLEY.
>> Woodruff: AS WE REPORTED
EARLIER, AFTER MUCH DEBATE,
CONGRESS TODAY PASSED A SHORT
TERM EXTENSION OF THE HIGHWAY
TRUST FUND.
BUT YEARS OF CUTBACKS IN FEDERAL
TRANSPORTATION AND LOCAL
FUNDING, ARE BEING FELT IN
COMMUNITIES AROUND THE COUNTRY.
THE NEWSHOUR'S CAT WISE TAKES A
LOOK AT SOME OF THE KEY
TRANSPORTATION ISSUES FACING
PORTLAND, OREGON AND THE
SURROUNDING REGION.
>> Reporter: EARLY ONE MORNING
THIS WEEK, AS THOUSANDS OF
COMMUTERS DROVE OVERHEAD, OREGON
BRIDGE INSPECTOR JOEL BOOTHE
HOISTED HIMSELF 100 FEET UP IN
THE AIR AND GOT TO WORK.
BOOTHE WAS DOING A ROUTINE
INSPECTION OF ONE OF THE STATES
BUSIEST BRIDGES: THE MARQUAM
BRIDGE BUILT IN 1966.
IT CARRIES ABOUT 90,000 VEHICLES
A DAY ON INTERSTATE 5 OVER THE
WILLAMETTE RIVER NEAR DOWNTOWN
PORTLAND.
UNLIKE SOME OF THE OTHER BRIDGES
IN PORTLAND, ITS IN FAIRLY GOOD
SHAPE, BUT ITS STILL GOT SOME
ISSUES.
ON BOTH SIDES OF THE LOCATION,
WE'VE HAD SOME --
ISSUES THAT ARE BEING CLOSELY
MONITORED BY THE STATES CHIEF
BRIDGE ENGINEER, BRUCE JOHNSON
>> THEY FOUND SOME PACK RUST, SO
WEVE GOT SOME CORROSION GOING ON
IN SOME SECTIONS OF OUR STEEL.
THE OTHER ISSUE THIS BRIDGE HAS
HAD A LOT OF FATIGUE CRACKING,
AND OF COURSE WE'VE MITIGATED
THE CRACKS BY DOING REPAIRS, BUT
WERE CONCERNED ABOUT THE
PERFORMANCE OF OUR REPAIRS AND
HOW THE CRACKING IS GOING.
>> Reporter: JOHNSON SAYS THAT
MAINTAINING BRIDGE SAFETY IS A
HUGE TASK FOR THE STATE.
>> IN OREGON, WE HAVE AN OLD
INVENTORY OF BRIDGES.
WE HAVEN'T BEEN FUNDED TO
SYSTEMATICALLY UPGRADE AND RENEW
OUR INFRASTRUCTURE.
SO IN A LOT OF CASES WE'VE BEEN
PATCHING AND TRYING TO KEEP
OLDER BRIDGES OPERATIONAL AND
SAFE.
ALSO IN OREGON, WE'RE VULNERABLE
TO A VERY, VERY LARGE CASCADIA
SUBDUCTION ZONE.
AND WHEN THAT HAPPENS,
UNFORTUNATELY WERE NOT PREPARED.
>> Reporter: THE CASCADIA
SUBDUCTION ZONE IS A FAULT-LINE
OFF THE COAST OF THE PACIFIC
NORTHWEST THAT SCIENTISTS
BELIEVE IS CAPABLE OF PRODUCING
A MAJOR 8.0 OR LARGER EARTHQUAKE
IN THE NEXT 50 YEARS.
WHEN THE BIG BIG ONE HITS, MANY
OF THE BRIDGES IN THE STATE ARE
EXPECTED TO COLLAPSE, INCLUDING
THE ROSS ISLAND BRIDGE IN
PORTLAND AND THE INTERSTATE
BRIDGE-- AN IMPORTANT ARTERY FOR
THE REGION CONNECTING PORTLAND
TO VANCOUVER, WASHINGTON.
THE PRICE TAG FOR SEISMICALLY
UPGRADING OREGONS BRIDGES IS
HUNDREDS OF MILLIONS OF DOLLARS.
MONEY, JOHNSON SAYS, THE STATE
DOESN'T HAVE.
>> IN OREGON BECAUSE OF REDUCED
STATE FUNDING, WE RELY HEAVILY
ON FEDERAL FUNDING TO DO THE
MAJORITY OF THE SERIOUS, THE
HEAVY WORK, THE MAJOR
REHABILITATION AND REPLACEMENT
OF OUR STRUCTURES.
>> Reporter: REPAIRING THE
BRIDGES HERE IN PORTLAND AND
AROUND THE STATE IS A TOP
PRIORITY FOR LOCAL OFFICIALS.
BUT OREGON, LIKE MANY OTHER
STATES, HAS A LONG LIST OF MUCH-
NEEDED TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS.
PROJECTS THAT HAVE BEEN IMPACTED
IN RECENT YEARS BY CUTBACKS IN
FEDERAL FUNDING.
THE CUTBACKS IN TRANSPORTATION
FUNDING ARE BEING FELT IN THE
TOWN OF NEWBERG, WHICH SITS ON A
MAJOR ROUTE FROM PORTLAND TO THE
OREGON COAST.
TRAFFIC BACKUPS HERE ARE
NOTORIOUS.
A NEW BYPASS FOR THE AREA HAS
BEEN IN THE WORKS FOR YEARS, BUT
THE STATES ORIGINAL PLANS FOR A
FOUR-LANE, 11 MILE HIGHWAY, WERE
SCALED BACK SEVERAL YEARS AGO TO
A TWO-LANE, FOUR MILE ROAD-- NOT
ENOUGH FEDERAL FUNDING.
>> TRAFFIC IS ALWAYS ON
EVERYONE'S MINDS.
>> Reporter: 26-YEAR-OLD ALI
McLEOD IS A CARPENTRY APPRENTICE
WHO GREW UP HERE AND WAS HIRED
TO WORK ON THE PROJECT.
SHE SAYS MANY IN THE LOCAL
COMMUNITY ARE WORRIED THE
SHORTER BYPASS WONT ACTUALLY
SOLVE THE TRAFFIC PROBLEMS.
>> THEY'RE ALL PRETTY UPSET
ABOUT
KNOWING A LOT OF PEOPLE FROM THE
AREA, EVERYBODY'S JUST LIKE,
WELL, WELL SEE IF IT WORKS.
>> Reporter: THE COST OF THE
$175 MILLION PROJECT HAS BEEN
SHOULDERED BY THE STATE AND
THAT'S MEANT SOME CREATIVE
FINANCING ACCORDING TO TOM
FULLER WITH THE OREGON
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION.
>> NORMALLY THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT PAYS FOR ABOUT NINETY
PERCENT OF THE CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS, THE STATE PAYS FOR
ABOUT 10%.
THERE JUST ISN'T ANY FEDERAL
MONEY FOR US TO DO PROJECTS LIKE
THIS, SO THE STATES GOT TO GET
VERY CREATIVE.
SO WE DO THINGS LIKE SELLING
BONDS, USING LOTTERY MONEY.
EVEN COMING UP WITH ENTIRELY NEW
WAYS OF CHARGING PEOPLE TO USE
THE ROADS.
WE'VE GOT TO DO SOMETHING,
BECAUSE THE NEEDS NOT GOING
AWAY, EVEN THOUGH THE DOLLARS
AREN'T THERE FROM D.C.
>> Reporter: BUT FEDERAL
TRANSPORTATION DOLLARS AREN'T
JUST USED TO BUILD NEW FREEWAYS;
THEY ALSO TRICKLE DOWN TO THE
LOCAL LEVEL WHERE THEY'RE NEEDED
FOR MUCH MORE BASIC PROJECTS.
>> NO SIDEWALKS HERE AND A VERY
BUSY STREET.
>> Reporter: LEAH TREAT IS THE
DIRECTOR OF PORTLAND'S BUREAU OF
TRANSPORTATION.
SHE TOOK ME TO A NEIGHBORHOOD
SHE SAYS HIGHLIGHTS THE NEED FOR
MORE FUNDING, FROM PEDESTRIAN
IMPROVEMENTS TO ROAD REPAIR.
>> WE CAN REPLICATE THIS
SITUATION IN DOZENS OF AREAS OF
THE CITY WHERE WE HAVE THREE
HUNDRED MILES OF MISSING
SIDEWALKS.
WE HAVE CLOSE TO 5,000 LANE
MILES OF ROADWAY, AND WITH OUR
LIMITED RESOURCES WE ARE ONLY
ABLE TO DO PREVENTATIVE
MAINTENANCE ON 100 MILES A YEAR.
>> Reporter: THE CITY ALSO WANTS
MORE FEDERAL FUNDS FOR
INNOVATIVE PROJECTS LIKE THE NEW
SOUTH WATERFRONT NEIGHBORHOOD,
DEVELOPED WITH A MIX OF FEDERAL,
STATE, LOCAL AND PRIVATE FUNDS,
AND WHICH OFFERS PEOPLE A
VARIETY OF TRANSPORTATION
OPTIONS.
THE COUNTRY'S FIRST-EVER BRIDGE
OPEN ONLY TO BIKES, PEDESTRIANS,
AND TRANSIT-- NOT PRIVATE CARS--
WILL OPEN IN SEPTEMBER.
JENNIFER DILL, WHO STUDIES
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION ISES,SU
SAYS THERE'S A NEED FOR MORE
SUCH PROJECTS.
>> THERE'S A LOT OF CITIES IN
THE U.S. RIGHT NOW THAT REALLY
WANT TO INVEST IN MORE
MULTIMODAL SYSTEMS, MORE
PEDESTRIAN INFRASTRUCTURE, BIKE
INFRASTRUCTURE, MORE INNOVATING
TYPES OF INFRASTRUCTURE.
AND THE FEDS HAVE BEEN LAGGING A
LITTLE BEHIND ON THAT.
>> Reporter: OREGON
TRANSPORTATION OFFICIALS SAY THE
TEMPORARY HIGHWAY FUNDING DEAL
WORKED OUT THIS WEEK IN
WASHINGTON IS A GOOD STEP, BUT
THEY'D RATHER HAVE A LONG-TERM,
CONSISTENT SOURCE OF FUNDING
FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
FOR THE PBS NEWSHOUR, I'M CAT
WISE IN PORTLAND, OREGON.
>> Ifill: RIO DE JANEIRO MAY
SOUND QUITE APPEALING AS THE
HOST SITE OF NEXT YEAR'S SUMMER
OLYMPICS.
BUT A NEW REPORT OUT TODAY FINDS
ATHLETES COULD BE SWIMMING AND
BOATING IN WATERS THAT ARE
HIGHLY CONTAMINATED, POLLUTED BY
SEWAGE, VIRUSES AND FECAL
MATTER.
THE INVESTIGATION BY THE
ASSOCIATED PRESS SUGGESTS
ATHLETES COULD BECOME ILL AS
THEY COMPETE.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM HAS THE STORY.
>> Brangham: RIO'S POLLUTED
WATERS ARE THE RESULT OF DECADES
OF NEGLECTED OR NONEXISTENT
SEWAGE INFRASTRUCTURE, SO IN THE
COMING WEEKS, AS TRIALS AND TEST
RUNS BEGIN FOR THE 2016
OLYMPICS, SOME ATHLETES WILL BE
COMPETING IN WATERS THAT CONTAIN
OVER A MILLION TIMES MORE
CONTAMINATION THAN LEVELS
ALLOWED IN U.S. WATERS.
BRADLEY BROOKS IS THE BUREAU
CHIEF FOR THE A.P. IN BRAZIL.
HE CO-WROTE THIS NEW
INVESTIGATION AND HE JOINS ME
NOW FROM RIO.
SO, BRADLEY BROOKS, HOW DID
THESE WATERS GET SO POL POLUTED?
>> WILLIAM, THESE WATERS HAVE
BEEN POLLUTED FOR DECADE AND
BASICALLY WHAT HAPPENS IS THAT
RIO GREW SO FAST SINCE THE
1960s THAT THE INFRASTRUCTURE
OF THE SEWAGE SYSTEM COULD NOT
KEEP UP WITH THE GROWTH.
SO WHAT YOU HAVE ARE POOR
COMMUNITIES, SLUMS, THAT CLING
TO THESE STEEP HILLSIDE AND HAVE
SEWAGE, SO THE SEWAGE RUNS
DOWNHILL AND DRAINS INTO THE
BASIN BOLE THAT IS
RIO DE JANEIRO AND FLOWS INTO
THE STREAMS AND LAKES AND
OCEANS.
>> PEOPLE IN THE U.S. ARE
FAMILIAR WHEN THE BACTERIA
LEVELS GET TO A CERTAIN LEVEL
THEY CLOSE BEACH ALSO.
HOW DO THE LEVELS YOU FOUND IN
RIO COMPARE TO THE U.S.?
>> THEY'RE ASTRONOMICAL.
EVEN THE BACTERIAL LEVELS ARE
MUCH, MUCH HIGHER THAN YOU SEE
IN THE U.S.
THE A.P. STUDY WENT FURTHER.
WE SEARCHED FOR VIRUSES THAT ARE
SPECIFICALLY LINKED TO HUMAN
SEWAGE.
THOSE NUMBERS THAT WE FOUND ARE
OFF THE CHARTS, ASTRONOMICAL.
SCIENTISTS THAT WE SPOKE WITH IN
THE U.S., IN BRAZIL AND IN
EUROPE SAID THAT THEY ARE
NUMBERS THAT THEY'VE NEVER SEEN
ANYWHERE ELSE.
HERE IN BRAZIL, THE DIFFERENCE
IS THEY DON'T CLOSE THE BEACH.
>> Brangham: WHAT DOES THIS
MEAN FOR THE ATHLETES?
THEY HAVE TO GET INTO THE
WATERS.
WHAT ARE THE CHANCES ATHLETES
COMPETING IN THE EVENTS ARE
GOING TO GET SICK?
>> THE U.S. ANALYST RAN ARISK
ASSESSMENT AND SAID THERE'S A
99% CHANCE ATHLETES WILL BE
INFECTED BY ONE OF THESE VIRUSES
IF THEY INGEST 3-TEASPOON OF
WATER.
I SHOULD UNDERSCORE THAT JUST
BECAUSE THEY ARE INFECTED, THAT
DOES NOT MEAN THEY WILL GET
SICK.
IF THEY FALL ILL, THAT DEPENDS
ON A NUMBER OF OTHER FACTORS
THAT ARE UNKNOWN UNTIL THEY
ACTUALLY INGEST THE WATER.
>> Brangham: IS THERE ANYTHING
AN ATHLETE CAN DO TO PROTECT
THEMSELVES?
IF THEY HAVE TO GET IN THE
WATER, IS THERE ANYTHING THEY
HAVE TO DO IN ADVANCE TO PROTECT
THEMSELVES IN.
>> WELL, THERE'S NO PROTECTIVE
GEAR, PER SE.
SOME PEOPLE SUGGESTED WEARING
MASKS SO THEY DON'T HAVE TO
INHALE DROPLETS.
ONE OF OUR EXPERTS IN THE U.S.
SUGGESTED THAT THE ATHLETES SHOW
UP IN RIO MUCH EARLIER THAN THEY
EXPECTED TO SIMPLY EXPOSE
THEMSELVES TO THE VIRUSES AND,
IN ESSENCE, TO MAKE THEMSELVES
GET SICK SEVERAL TIMES SO THAT,
BY THE TIME THE OLYMPICS ROLLS
AROUND, THEY MIGHT HAVE BUILT UP
IMMUNITIES.
MOST HEALTH EXPERTS SAY THAT'S
IMPOSSIBLE, IT TAKES YEARS AND
YEARS TO BUILD UP IMMUNITIES TO
THESE VIRUSES.
>> Brangham: HAS THE
INTERNATIONAL OLYMPIC COMMITTEE
SAID ANYTHING ABOUT YOUR
FINDINGS?
ARE THEY GOING TO DO ANYTHING
ABOUT THIS?
>> THE I.O.C. AND BRAZILIAN
OFFICIALS TOLD "THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS" TODAY THAT THEY WILL NOT
CHANGE THE WAY THEY EVALUATE THE
HEALTH OF THE WATER, MEANING
THEY WILL CONTINUE ONLY TO LOOK
FOR BACTERIA, NOT VIRUSES
DESPITE THE FACT OUR STUDY
SHOWED ASTRONOMICKICLE LEVELS OF
VIRUSES IN THE WATER.
IN ADDITION TO THAT.
THE BRAZILIAN OFFICIALS BLASTED
OUT AT THE AP.
THEY QUESTIONED OUR DATA.
THEY QUESTIONED THE INTEGRITY OF
THE SCIENTISTS WHO CARRIED OUT
OUR DATA AND THEY QUESTIONED THE
UNIVERSITY THAT HE IS ATTACHED
TO.
THEY DID ALL THAT INSTEAD OF
SIMPLY ANSWERING THE QUESTION OF
WHETHER OR NOT THEY'RE GOING TO
LOOK INTO THIS QUESTION OF
VIRUSES IN THE WATER.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT,
BRADLEY BROOKS OF THE ASSOCIATED
PRESS.
THANKS SO MUCH FOR BEING HERE.
>> THANK YOU, I APPRECIATE IT.
>> Woodruff: NOW OUR REGULAR
FEATURE, "BRIEF BUT
SPECTACULAR."
THIS WEEK WE HEAR FROM ARTIST
MARIA ABRAMOVIC, WHO TONIGHT
SHARES HER THOUGHTS ABOUT
PERFORMANCE AND INTERACTIONS
WITH AUDIENCES.
FOR ME, THE PERFORMANCE IS
ONE OF THE MOST INFORMATIVE.
THE PERFORMANCE CAN REALLY
CHANGE YOUR LIFE.
I LIKE TO WORK WITH THEM, PUSH
THEM, I TAKE TO TAKE THEM OUT OF
THEIR COMFORT ZONE AND MAKE A
NEW EXPERIENCE.
IF YOU WANT REALLY TO CONNECT
WITH THE PUBLIC, YOU HAVE TO
SHOW YOUR TRUE SELF, AND ANY
HUMAN BEING IS NOT PERFECT.
ANOTHER HUMAN BEING THEY HAVE
THE PARTS THEY LIKE TO HIDE
ESPECIALLY THE ONES THEY'RE
ASHAMED OF.
THE HUMAN HAS TO DEFEND HIS OWN
PURPOSE IN THIS PLANET.
NOT JUST SIT IN FRONT OF THE
COMPUTER AND TWITTER.
IF WE'RE GOING THROUGH LIFE, WE
SIT IN FRONT OF THE WATERFALL OR
THE ASSOCIATION OR THE CHAIR
QUIETLY AND LOOKING OUT THE
WINDOW SOMETIMES IS MORE
IMPORTANT, MORE REFLECTIVE AND
MORE REFLECTIVE OF THE
CONSCIENCE.
THERE ARE PERFORMERS I RESPECT
VERY MUCH.
SPENDING THREE MONTHS, JUST
SITTING THERE, IT CHANGES
EVERYTHING.
I WAS DIFFERENT.
MY NAME IS MARIA ABRAMOVIC. BUTR
TAKE ON ART, LIFE AND BEYOND.
>> Ifill: YOU CAN SEE OUR OTHER
"BRIEF BUT SPECTACULARS" ON OUR
FACEBOOK PAGE.
TUNE IN LATER TONIGHT, ON
CHARLIE ROSE: THE DEATH OF THE
TALIBAN'S MULLAH OMAR, AND WHAT
IT MEANS FOR AFGHANISTAN.
>> Woodruff: AND THAT'S THE
NEWSHOUR FOR TONIGHT.
ON FRIDAY, AMERICA'S AGING FLEET
OF NUCLEAR SUBS, THE BILLIONS OF
DOLLARS NEEDED TO UPGRADE A
FORCE NO ONE EVER WANTS TO USE.
HERE'S A PREVIEW:
>> BATTLE STATIONS.
ALL MISSILES.
SOUND THE ALARM.
(ALARM SOUNDING)
>> IF AMERICA'S STRATEGY OF
NUCLEAR DETERRENCE EVER FAILS,
THE BEGINNING OF THE END MIGHT
LOOK SOMETHING LIKE THIS.
>> ONE SIX ZERO FEET.
AYE-AYE, SIR.
SUBMERGED JUST OFF THE COAST
OF HAWAII, THE 180 MAN CREW OF
THE U.S.S. PENNSYLVANIA
DEMONSTRATED FOR THE PBS
"NewsHour" AN ABRIDGED VERSION
OF WHAT IT PRACTICES EVERY WEEK
WITH SUBS AT SEA.
>> Woodruff: I'M JUDY WOODRUFF.
>> Ifill: AND I'M GWEN IFILL.
JOIN US ONLINE, AND AGAIN HERE
TOMORROW EVENING WITH MARK
SHIELDS AND DAVID BROOKS.
FOR ALL OF US AT THE PBS
NEWSHOUR, THANK YOU AND GOOD
NIGHT.